% VALIDNS(1)
% Anton Berezin
% April 2011

# NAME

validns - DNS and DSNSEC zone file validator

# VERSION

This document describes validns version 0.8

# SYNOPSIS

validns *-h*
validns [*options*] *zone-file*

For validating stdin, specify "-" in place of *zone-file*.

# DESCRIPTION

Coming soon.

# OPTIONS

-h
:   Produce usage text and quit.

-f
:   Quit on first validation error.  Normally,
    `validns` continues working on a zone after encountering
    a parsing or validation error.

-p *name*
:   Activate policy check *name*.
    By default, only basic checks and DNSSEC
    checks are performed.
    This option can be specified multiple times.
    See **POLICY CHECKS**, below, for details.

-n *N*
:   Use N worker threads for parallelizable operations.
    The default is 0, meaning no parallelization.
    Currently only signature verification is parallelizable.

-q
:   quiet - do not produce any output

-s
:   Print validation summary/stats.
    If specified twice, also print record counts by type.

-v
:   be extra verbose

-M
:   use SOA MINTTL as the default TTL when no TTL specified

-I *path*
:   use this path for $INCLUDE files

-z *origin*
:   use this origin as initial $ORIGIN

-t *epoch-time*
:   Use specified time instead of the current time
    when verifying validity of the signatures.
    This option may be specified multiple times,
    in which case every signature is checked
    against all specified times.

# BASIC CHECKS

Every record and every supported directive should be parsable,
which consitutes the most basic check of all.
The `validns` program will report the exact reason
why it cannot parse a record or a directive.

Other basic checks include:

- there could only be one SOA in a zone;
- the first record in the zone must be an SOA record;
- a record outside the apex;
- TTL values differ within an RR set (excepting *RRSIG*);

# DNSSEC CHECKS

- *type* exists, but NSEC does not mention it for *name*;
- NSEC mentions *type*, but no such record found for *name*;
- NSEC says *x* is the last name, but *z* exists;
- NSEC says *z* comes after *x*, but nothing does;
- NSEC says *z* comes after *x*, but *y* does;
- signature is too new;
- signature is too old;
- RRSIG exists for non-existing type *type*;
- RRSIG's original TTL differs from corresponding record's;
- RRSIG(*type*): cannot find a signer key;
- RRSIG(*type*): cannot verify the signature;
- RRSIG(*type*): cannot find the right signer key;
- NSEC3 record name is not valid;
- multiple NSEC3 with the same record name;
- no corresponding NSEC3 found for *name*;
- *type* exists, but NSEC3 does not mention it for *name*;
- NSEC3 mentions *type*, but no such record found for *name*;
- there are more record types than NSEC3 mentions for *name*;
- broken NSEC3 chain, expected *name*, but nothing found;
- broken NSEC3 chain, expected *name1*, but found *name2*;
- NSEC3 without a corresponding record (or empty non-terminal).

# POLICY CHECKS

The following policy checks are understood:

**single-ns**

: Checks that there are at least two NS records per name (or zero).

**cname-other-data**

: Checks for CNAME and other data condition (excluding possible and NSEC).

**dname**

: DNAME checks: no multiple DNAMEs, no descendants of a node with a DNAME.
Please note that DNAME/CNAME clash is handled by CNAME and other data check already.

**dnskey**

: DNSKEY checks: public key too short, leading zero octets in public key exponent or modulus.

**nsec3param-not-apex**

: NSEC3PARAM, if present, should only be at the zone apex.

**mx-alias**

: MX exchange should not be an alias.

**ns-alias**

: NS nsdname should not be an alias.

**rp-txt-exists**

: TXT domain name mentioned in RP record must have
a corresponding TXT record if it is within the zone.

**tlsa-host**

: Domain name of a TLSA record must be a proper prefixed DNS name.

**ksk-exists**

: A KSK key must exist in a signed zone.

**smimea-host**

: Domain name must have the form which is proper for an SMIMEA record.

**all**

: Activates all of the above policy checks.

# BUGS

- textual segments in *TXT* and *HINFO* must be enclosed in double quotes;
- a dot within a label is not currently supported;

If at least one NSEC3 record uses opt-out flag,
`validns` assumes it is used as much as possible,
that is, every unsigned delegation does not have
a corresponding NSEC3 record.
This is done for reasons of efficiency, to
avoid calculating cryptographic hashes of
every unsigned delegation.
If this assumption is wrong for a zone,
`validns` will produce spurious validation
errors.

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks go to
Andy Holdaway,
Daniel Stirnimann,
Dennis Kjaer Jensen,
Goran Bengtson,
Hirohisa Yamaguchi,
Hugo Salgado,
Jake Zack,
Jakob Schlyter,
Koh-ichi Ito,
Mathieu Arnold,
Miek Gieben,
Patrik Wallstrom,
Paul Wouters,
Ryan Eby,
Tony Finch,
Willem Toorop,
and YAMAGUCHI Takanori
for bug reports, testing, discussions,
and occasional patches.

Special thanks to
Stephane Bortzmeyer and Phil Regnauld.

Thanks for AFNIC which funded major portion of the development.
Thanks for SWITCH for additional funding.

